---
layout: post
title:  "What GOOGLE Can’t Tell You About Data Visualization"
author: Ashwin
categories: [ DataViz ]
image: assets/images/dataviz_interview/title.jpg
---

This summer I decided to take on a new challenge and learn something valuable in the world of data analytics, ‘Data Visualization’. After running a quick google search I realized that creating a visualization isn’t as simple as it looks. There were millions of different variables that we have to choose from to get a decent dashboard. So I decided to talk to the best and the brightest out there who were recently selected as Tableau Public Featured Authors and here is what I learn from them.
Here are some of Tableau’s featured authors who shared their inspiration and methodology with me.
Image for post
Dzifa Amexo — Vinodh Kumar — Thi Ho — Max Tham — Nitin Paighowal
When we are learning the art of data viz, we do it for one of the two reasons,
Monitoring and Maintaining KPI’s for business needs in an organization
The analytical artist in you is trying to thrive in your leisure time
Bottom-up Approach -
In this approach, we have the requirements and outcomes set from the beginning. All that needs to be done is to clean the data and present it in such a way that it highlights the key metrics. These visualizations usually consist of line or bar graphs and are then presented to executive management and hence we annotate it well.
The primary goal here is to track your progress with various metrics and present it to the executive leadership team, who most probably won’t have all the time in the world.
The underlying philosophy here is that “Numbers don’t lie, so show me numbers”.
Top-Down Approach -
This is a more free-flowing approach where the outcomes aren't defined and your creativity can flourish. The underlying philosophy here is that “Creativity doesn’t have a limit, let’s have some fun”.
My focus was to understand the process of being creative and at the same time come up with a process-based system of making data talk.
Why you ask? Because “A Picture worth a thousand words” and I’m no Shakespeare. Its a way to express mysself without boring the reader.
Chicken Egg Problem of Data first vs Idea first
When it comes to starting a data viz project, there is always a paradox of should I get the data first and start building on it later? or do I think about an idea first and start putting together the data to visualize it.
From speaking with tableau featured authors, I understood that its both.
Image for post
Coffee Bean Belt — Nitin Paighowal
“When I was waiting in line at Starbucks, I saw a poster about the presence of coffee worldwide, and there came the idea for the Coffee Bean Belt viz” — Nitin Paighowal.
Image for post
#TheSDGVizProject & #ProjectHealthViz | Goal3 — Thi Ho
“I was lucky enough to have the dataset ready for use and I did not have to do much prep. For a large dataset, I do have to think about what I want to focus on. For instance, #TheSDGVizProject Goal 3 viz, the dataset was huge and I chose to focus on the South East Asian region, where I am from. In regard to the process, I usually explore the data to find a story and key story point” — Thi Ho.
Sometimes you also get inspired by design, one good source is Pinterest, by only adding a few pins, it gives you great suggestions for more ideas. One other great source for design inspirations would be Dribble.
Image for post
Image for post
Pinterest and Dribble
“I often maintain a list of ideas on my phone about the topics I want to viz about and when I stumble upon an interesting design on Pinterest or Dribble I try to think how a particular design can cut for the topic I was to Viz. One of the dashboards which came out of this process was the one on Juneteenth” — Dzifa Amexo.
Image for post
Juneteenth — Dzifa Amexo
Explore and understand the data
Before you put the Picasso in you to work, it’s important to get interesting insights from the dataset and understanding why those insights matter.
“It’s very easy to get sidetracked when you are exploring a dataset, it’s very important to fixate on what you are going to viz, is it just going to be an overall key metrics which is more like an informational dashboard or are we going to dig deep into a particular metric and understand why things are the way they are” — Vinodh Kumar.
Vinodh works mostly towards understanding Sustainable Development Goals and also runs a project #TheSDGVizProject, one of the visualizations he created was based on Food waste & Hunger was to understand the key relationship between the 2 sustainability goals “sustainable consumption and production patterns “ and “Zero Hunger”.
Image for post
Food waste & Hunger — Vinodh Kumar
Always Start By Sketching
Image for post
Photo by https://xkcd.com/
This step is often skipped by most of us. But sketching is a very crucial step since it helps in collecting and structuring our thoughts on a piece of paper.
“Sketching gives me a sense of accomplishment, its often the first real thing you have on your hand and its often the best place to start you viz, even if you don’t end up translating a sketch into you dashboard one hundred percent” — Max Tham
Image for post
Image for post
The best LGBT movies — Max Tham

Image for post
Image for post
Interactive Resume — Dzifa Amexo
Design — Making it look Pretty
This step usually happens parallelly with all the other steps which were discussed earlier. Design can be a source of inspiration by itself, or it can be a way to express your data in a more presentable way that your audience will be attracted to it.
At the same time, we cannot validate one design is better than the other with a set of rules. Every design is unique on its own and can give a different perspective.
Having set that, you can get started with few things.
Color
Selecting a color schema can be overwhelming and dreadful at the same time.
“When I started out you can see my dashboards had tons of colors on them and it was disorganized, but recently I have started being mindful on the number of colors I use” — Nitin Paighowal.
One rule that helps when deciding on a color pallet is “The Rule of 3 Colors”
The Rule of 3 Colors — Pick one primary color. Then, pick two other complementary colors. The main goal here is to simplify things for you and the reader — by going this way, colors don’t fight for attention.
One such example from Max is displayed on the Car insurance rates in 2020 dashboard.
Image for post
Car insurance rates in 2020 — Max Tham
Few resources which often come in handy when selecting colors are,
Colorbrewer2 — Colorbrewer would be my personal favorite as it has an option to select a color pallet that works well with the colorblind audience. Worldwide, there are approximately 300 million people with color blindness, almost the same number of people as the entire population of the USA! So it’s a good practice to consider a color pallet that is accommodative of the entire population.
Image for post
Colorbrewer2
Adobe Color — Adobe once again proves that its the master of the art world, adobe color is mind-blowing, you can go from creating a color pallet with a complimentary rule or extract color from an existing image.
Image for post
Image for post
Adobe Color
Dribble — If you are using dribble, there is an option at the bottom of every design which shows the various colors along with the HEX code used in the design.
Image for post
Dribble
White Space — The one thing that separates a rookie from the legends is the appropriate use of white space, this is one of those things where the more your practice and observe expert’s visualizations the better you get, it’s difficult to set up a rule to manage white space.
Practice Makes Perfect — This might be true for the whole process of data visualization but this is indefinitely applied when managing white space.
“The one thing which I struggled in the earlier days was to manage white space, but its really the more your practice the better you get a sense of it” — Dzifa Amexo.
Organizing your dashboard
While color and white space are very important for a stunning design, organizing your dashboard in a way that tells a story to the viewer is equally crucial as well.
Some tools can come in handy when it comes to organizing a dashboard. One of the most popular tools out there is Adobe Illustrator, but it comes only with subscriptions and if you are a data enthusiast who is not making money out of your design work, having a subscription may not make sense to you.
There are free tools like Figma, Sketch and Adobe XD which help you get organized, recently there has been a tremendous increase in the number of people who use Figma as their primary design tool, there might be few reasons for this, but one of the primary reasons is that its free and you don’t have to worry about installing anything on your computer, Just login and start designing your dashboard.
Image for post
Tweet from Robert Janezic
Here is a tweet from @RobertJanezic, which illustrated a final product after using Figma in the design progress to organize the dashboard.
Fonts
When you are using a certain font, the chances are that it might not work with the web browser or it might be slightly different from how it looks on your desktop, so it’s a good practice always to test your font on different platforms with completely different environments to make sure it works as expected.
When it comes to working with Tableau, the tableau public version only supports certain fonts and colors. so it’s better to check the below guide from James Fox about the different fonts and how it will look on the web after you publish it.
Image for post
Tableau Font and Colour Guide — James Fox
A rule of thumb is that always try to stick with the least number of fonts as possible for a particular dashboard.
Apart from the above guide from James, you can also make use of Google Fonts and Font pair when considering different fonts.
Getting Feedback
This is the single most important step of the entire process. After one is done with a dashboard, getting feedback from peers or mentors can help in so many different ways from reiterating the dashboard with a different design to getting a different perspective on the insights.
I’m pretty sure by this point that everyone in the community wants to see you succeed and you won’t get a rude reply from anyone when you reach out to them. Just be considerate of their time and be polite with your request.
When asked what’s one thing they wish they knew about Data viz when they started their data viz journey, the answer was more or less the same. Getting into the community and getting feedback.
“The one thing I wish I knew when I first started out was to publish my work on a public forum and get feedback, I literally kind of waster 1–2 years before I started getting feedback” — Nitin Paighowal
“If you are a bot skeptical about posting your work online on a public forum, there are many ways to get feedback privately. Talk to people on twitter privately and a lot of people are willing to give you feedback” — Max Tham
“ I wish I had known about the #datafam earlier! Imagine how much more I could have learned and how much more fun I could have had! “ — Thi Ho
“If you are talking one thing from this whole blog, it’s that don’t be afraid to get feedback, that’s one of the fastest ways you can grow. Everyone on the community wants to see you succeed” — Vinodh Kumar
“Become involved in the community, I was scared if people will fell im not creative enough. Everyone wants to see you succeded, done be afraid to come into the community. Feedback is important — I hate critiques, but the more you hear the more you improve and get it and improve. Feedback is a gift. Don’t compare yourself with others, if you focus on what you bring to the table, let it be unique and make quality work. Just be confident, be yourself” — Dzifa Amexo
Where do I start?
I understand that it can be overwhelming to step into the field without knowing a lot, but often the hardest step is to start, and here are a few places you can start.
#Datafam — A twitter hashtag which has a very huge community. This might be a single best response to get feedback on your work, get inspired by a ton of stunning viz every day, and meet new people from all levels of expertise.
MakeoverMonday — Makeover Monday is your weekly learning and development appointment with yourself and hundreds of passionate data people. For free! Join us every Monday to work with a given data set and create better, more effective visualizations and help us make information more accessible. The Makeover Monday community comes together every week from around the globe and we would love for YOU to become part of it, too.
Twitter — #MakeoverMonday
TheSDGVizProject -This project focuses on the third level of action; People Action. Our goal is to use social media and data visualization to:
Raise awareness and promote the Sustainable Development Goals;
Measure and report on progress towards the SDG’s
Provide insight into the quality of life inequities around the globe; and
provide opportunities for our community to contribute locally towards meeting the global goals
Twitter — #TheSDGVizProject
Workout Wednesday -
Each Wednesday a challenge is released and participants are asked to replicate the challenge that is posed as closely as possible. When you think you have it, leave a comment with a link to your visualization, share on Tableau Public, or post on Twitter for others to enjoy.
Twitter — #wow2020
Sports Viz Sunday — To all the sports fans out there, sports viz Sunday kicked off in January 2018 when three sports enthusiasts, brought together by the Tableau community, agreed to work together to share, create & promote visualizations from the world of sport.
The Alphabet Project — The idea here is to viz through themes based on the letter of the Alphabet on alternate weeks throughout 2020, we will increment the Alphabet letter every 2 weeks.
Thank you !!
Image for post
Photo by Dayne Topkin on Unsplash
It doesn’t have to be perfect, you just have to start — Anonymous
Good luck with your Data viz journey! I hope this post is helpful, and feel free to reach out to me on Twitter or Linkedin if you may have any questions.
If you are looking for the people who contributed to this post, you can find them on Twitter, follow the links below.
Dzifa Amexo — Vinodh Kumar — Thi Ho — Max Tham — Nitin Paighowal